If you decide to build a game for your capstone project,
having a conceptual understanding of how video games work will be
important both for your understanding of the code base that we provide,
and for your ability to build a new game from scratch.
One of the fundamental programming patterns seen in game development and
the pattern that forms the core of game functionality is the game loop.
Nearly all games have a loop that allows the program to do three things.
The first part of the game loop handles user inputs,
such as from a keyboard or controller.
Second part of the game loop updates the game state.
You can imagine in a 2D game.
The game state may contain a 2D vector or
array that keeps track of the location of a player.
In the image here, you can see a 2D array with
a single one indicating the location of the player in the game world.
In the update step, the stored location of the player might change,
and in that case, the array would be updated.
The last part of game loop renders the game state to the screen.
In the image here, you see the 2D array that indicates
the location of our player rendered as a character in the game window.
The game loop is usually implemented as
a while loop that runs continuously while the game is running.
For example, one pass through the while loop
might involve the player pressing the right arrow on the controller.
This input is then used to update the state of the game in the update step.
In this case, we've moved the number 1 to the right,
one index in the array.
Finally, in the render step,
the new status rendered,
and our character is moved one step to the right.
The game loop can then start again from the beginning.
In another iteration through the loop,
there might be no input.
Depending on how the game is implemented,
the update step might still change the game state,
and the rendering of the game will happen every pass through
the while loop regardless of the input or update steps.
One major benefit of using this design pattern in a game,
is that each part of the game loop can be implemented separately in code.
If you want to change the appearance of
your game without making major changes to how the game works,
you can just update the rendering code.
Similarly, you are free to modify the game play
without changing the rendering or import input portion of the code at all.